README.md, before:

# The electrostatic magic wand
## What it is
If you have seen Electroboom's video about creating a Harry Potter magic wand, this is my attemt to recreate it. 
This is a hand held battery operated device that generates around 50kV DC on the tip with very low maximum current in order for it to be somewhat safe.

## What to expect from this repository
All my files, documentation and links usful for creating an electroboom-style electrostatic magic wand.
This circuitry will work with standard components, in fact I built it mostly from stuff I had laying around.
If you try to build one youself, don't expect it to work on the first try. You will have to experiment a bit yourself. But that is the fun part in my oppinion.


## Supplies that might be useful
- Soldering iron and solder
- Multimeter to measure voltage and current
- Heat gun if you decide to pot the high voltage part in wax
- 3D Printer for printing the handle, button and the tip
- Oscilloscope for debugging the circuit
- Electrical tape for to keep parts from touching and make a battery pack

## How to build it
### Step 1: Aquire parts
#### Low voltage components
|name|rating|amount|link|
|---|---|---|---|
|MOSFET Q1, Q2|GS<sub>th</sub> < 3.5V, V<sub>ds</sub> > 50V, V<sub>gs</sub> > 15V, I<sub>D</sub> > 4A, R<sub>DS(on)</sub> < 100mΩ or Heatsink |2 pcs| any MOSFET with ratings better than the described minimum requirements. I used a small piece of copper foil as a heatsink as I used SMD MOSFETs. Buy: https://www.conrad.at/de/p/infineon-technologies-irlu3110zpbf-mosfet-1-n-kanal-140-w-to-251-3-564201.html|
|diodes D1, D2|50V, 1A Peak|2 pcs|any that fit this requirement e.g. https://www.conrad.at/de/p/vishay-schottky-diode-gleichrichter-mbr160-do-204al-60-v-einzeln-163687.html|
|diodes D5, D6|15V, 1A, preferrably low forward voltage drop|2pcs|any that fit this requirement e.g. https://www.conrad.at/de/p/vishay-schottky-diode-gleichrichter-mbr160-do-204al-60-v-einzeln-163687.html|
|zener diode|V<sub>Z</sub> 12V|2 pcs|any that fit this requirement e.g. https://www.conrad.at/de/p/diotec-z-diode-zy12-gehaeuseart-halbleiter-do-41-zener-spannung-12-v-leistung-max-p-tot-2-w-sperrspannung-u-r-7-v-2811697.html|
|resistors R1, R2|100Ω, 1W|2 pcs|any that fit this requirement or multiple in paralell / series to reach the desired resistance and power e.g. https://www.conrad.at/de/p/te-connectivity-1-1625885-2-metallschicht-widerstand-100-axial-bedrahtet-1-w-5-1-st-1677271.html|
|resistor R3|10kΩ|1 pc|any that fit this requirement, Power rating does not matter, this is a bleed resistor e.g. https://www.conrad.at/de/p/tru-components-1557259-kohleschicht-widerstand-10-k-axial-bedrahtet-0204-0-1-w-5-1-st-1557259.html|
|button SW1|12V|1 pc|using a standard small pushbutton soldered on a small pcb should fits inside the housing e.g. https://www.conrad.at/de/p/weltron-t602-t602-drucktaster-24-v-dc-0-05-a-1-x-aus-ein-tastend-l-x-b-x-h-6-x-6-x-5-0-mm-1-st-700460.html|
|on/off switch SW2|12V 5A|1 pc|make sure there are tabs to mount it in the case like this one: https://www.conrad.at/de/p/tru-components-6351072-tc-r13-603c-05-schiebeschalter-250-v-ac-3-a-1-x-ein-ein-1-st-1587768.html|
|power inductors L1, L2|3A average|2 pcs|sorry I can't measure inductance... I used one with a ferrite ring core, like this one: https://www.conrad.at/de/p/534455-drossel-ringkern-radial-bedrahtet-rastermass-10-mm-1000-h-16-a-1-st-534455.html|
|power capacitor C1|4µF, 100V, 10A, low ESR!|1 pc|I prefer multiple smaller capacitors in paralell for better heat dissipation like 4*1µF: https://www.conrad.at/de/p/suntan-ts02002e105ksb0f0r-1-st-folienkondensator-1-f-250-v-10-20-mm-l-x-b-8-5-mm-x-24-mm-3014375.html|
|battery connector J1|4 Pin, 5A|1 female per battery pack, 2 male| I used JST SMP connectors from a set like this: https://www.amazon.com/dp/B0C8N8JBDC/|
|lacker coated primary coil copper wire for T1|0.1mm, 100V|3m|I created my own litz wire by folding it multiple times until I have about 16 wires paralell, twisted them together and removed the coating from the ends. Wire like this: https://www.conrad.at/de/p/block-kupferlackdraht-aussen-durchmesser-ohne-isolierlack-0-15-mm-609-m-0-10-kg-605053.html|
|18650 battery BT1-4|Li-Ion 4A discharge|4 per battery pack|I used some from an old laptop battery. Buy new ones: e.g. https://www.conrad.at/de/p/voltcraft-vc-li-3-7-2000-spezial-akku-18650-li-ion-3-7-v-2000-mah-2749811.html|
#### High Voltage components
|name|rating|amount|link|
|---|---|---|---|
|High voltage capacitor|~1nF (102), 20kV|20 pcs|https://de.aliexpress.com/item/1005006355663702.html|
|High voltage diodes, fast recovery if possible|20kV|20 pcs|I used 4 5kV Diodes in series each https://www.conrad.at/de/p/tru-components-schnelle-si-hochspannungs-gleichrichterdiode-tc-hv5-do-15-5000-v-200-ma-1582088.html, but 2 of these each should work too: https://www.conrad.at/de/p/diotec-si-hochspannungs-gleichrichterdiode-2cl72a-d2-5x12-10000-v-1-a-2806788.html
|High voltage transformer|5kV, potted, ~9 windings primary|1 pc|I rewound the primary of this transformer using lacker coated wire (20 in paralell to handle the current) with 9 windings. This is important because of the skin effect! https://de.aliexpress.com/item/4001091321165.html |
#### Miscellaneous
|name|purpose|properties|amount|source|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|wax|coating the high voltage part and the gap in the transformer to avoid corona discharge in the gap between the transformer and the secondary winding|not brittle at room temperature (arcs can jump through cracks)|depends on the size of your circuit, ~150ml should be enough |candle wax idealy mixed with some sort of soft wax like bees wax, I used wax collected from the shell of cheese|
### Step 2: Assemble the circuit
### Step 3: Test the circuit and ajust frequency and power of the oscillator
### Step 4: Pot the high voltage parts
### Step 5: Ajust the 3d models to fit your build
### Step 6: Final Assembly
### Step 7: Make the battery pack
### Step 8: Make the charger

Commit message:

Add description for assembly (step 2) and images of the voltage multiplier

README.md, after:

# The electrostatic magic wand
## What it is
If you have seen Electroboom's video about creating a Harry Potter magic wand, this is my attemt to recreate it. 
This is a hand held battery operated device that generates around 50kV DC on the tip with very low maximum current in order for it to be somewhat safe.

## What to expect from this repository
All my files, documentation and links usful for creating an electroboom-style electrostatic magic wand.
This circuitry will work with standard components, in fact I built it mostly from stuff I had laying around.
If you try to build one youself, don't expect it to work on the first try. You will have to experiment a bit yourself. But that is the fun part in my oppinion.


## Supplies that might be useful
- Soldering iron and solder
- Multimeter to measure voltage and current
- Heat gun if you decide to pot the high voltage part in wax
- 3D Printer for printing the handle, button and the tip
- Oscilloscope for debugging the circuit
- Electrical tape for to keep parts from touching and make a battery pack

## How to build it
### Step 1: Aquire parts
#### Low voltage components
|name|rating|amount|link|
|---|---|---|---|
|MOSFET Q1, Q2|GS<sub>th</sub> < 3.5V, V<sub>ds</sub> > 50V, V<sub>gs</sub> > 15V, I<sub>D</sub> > 4A, R<sub>DS(on)</sub> < 100mΩ or Heatsink |2 pcs| any MOSFET with ratings better than the described minimum requirements. I used a small piece of copper foil as a heatsink as I used SMD MOSFETs. Buy: https://www.conrad.at/de/p/infineon-technologies-irlu3110zpbf-mosfet-1-n-kanal-140-w-to-251-3-564201.html|
|diodes D1, D2|50V, 1A Peak|2 pcs|any that fit this requirement e.g. https://www.conrad.at/de/p/vishay-schottky-diode-gleichrichter-mbr160-do-204al-60-v-einzeln-163687.html|
|diodes D5, D6|15V, 1A, preferrably low forward voltage drop|2pcs|any that fit this requirement e.g. https://www.conrad.at/de/p/vishay-schottky-diode-gleichrichter-mbr160-do-204al-60-v-einzeln-163687.html|
|zener diode|V<sub>Z</sub> 12V|2 pcs|any that fit this requirement e.g. https://www.conrad.at/de/p/diotec-z-diode-zy12-gehaeuseart-halbleiter-do-41-zener-spannung-12-v-leistung-max-p-tot-2-w-sperrspannung-u-r-7-v-2811697.html|
|resistors R1, R2|100Ω, 1W|2 pcs|any that fit this requirement or multiple in paralell / series to reach the desired resistance and power e.g. https://www.conrad.at/de/p/te-connectivity-1-1625885-2-metallschicht-widerstand-100-axial-bedrahtet-1-w-5-1-st-1677271.html|
|resistor R3|10kΩ|1 pc|any that fit this requirement, Power rating does not matter, this is a bleed resistor e.g. https://www.conrad.at/de/p/tru-components-1557259-kohleschicht-widerstand-10-k-axial-bedrahtet-0204-0-1-w-5-1-st-1557259.html|
|button SW1|12V|1 pc|using a standard small pushbutton soldered on a small pcb should fits inside the housing e.g. https://www.conrad.at/de/p/weltron-t602-t602-drucktaster-24-v-dc-0-05-a-1-x-aus-ein-tastend-l-x-b-x-h-6-x-6-x-5-0-mm-1-st-700460.html|
|on/off switch SW2|12V 5A|1 pc|make sure there are tabs to mount it in the case like this one: https://www.conrad.at/de/p/tru-components-6351072-tc-r13-603c-05-schiebeschalter-250-v-ac-3-a-1-x-ein-ein-1-st-1587768.html|
|power inductors L1, L2|3A average|2 pcs|sorry I can't measure inductance... I used one with a ferrite ring core, like this one: https://www.conrad.at/de/p/534455-drossel-ringkern-radial-bedrahtet-rastermass-10-mm-1000-h-16-a-1-st-534455.html|
|power capacitor C1|4µF, 100V, 10A, low ESR!|1 pc|I prefer multiple smaller capacitors in paralell for better heat dissipation like 4*1µF: https://www.conrad.at/de/p/suntan-ts02002e105ksb0f0r-1-st-folienkondensator-1-f-250-v-10-20-mm-l-x-b-8-5-mm-x-24-mm-3014375.html|
|battery connector J1|4 Pin, 5A|1 female per battery pack, 2 male| I used JST SMP connectors from a set like this: https://www.amazon.com/dp/B0C8N8JBDC/|
|lacker coated primary coil copper wire for T1|0.1mm, 100V|3m|I created my own litz wire by folding it multiple times until I have about 16 wires paralell, twisted them together and removed the coating from the ends. Wire like this: https://www.conrad.at/de/p/block-kupferlackdraht-aussen-durchmesser-ohne-isolierlack-0-15-mm-609-m-0-10-kg-605053.html|
|18650 battery BT1-4|Li-Ion 4A discharge|4 per battery pack|I used some from an old laptop battery. Buy new ones: e.g. https://www.conrad.at/de/p/voltcraft-vc-li-3-7-2000-spezial-akku-18650-li-ion-3-7-v-2000-mah-2749811.html|
#### High Voltage components
|name|rating|amount|link|
|---|---|---|---|
|High voltage capacitor|~1nF (102), 20kV|20 pcs|https://de.aliexpress.com/item/1005006355663702.html|
|High voltage diodes, fast recovery if possible|20kV|20 pcs|I used 4 5kV Diodes in series each https://www.conrad.at/de/p/tru-components-schnelle-si-hochspannungs-gleichrichterdiode-tc-hv5-do-15-5000-v-200-ma-1582088.html, but 2 of these each should work too: https://www.conrad.at/de/p/diotec-si-hochspannungs-gleichrichterdiode-2cl72a-d2-5x12-10000-v-1-a-2806788.html
|High voltage transformer|5kV, potted, ~9 windings primary|1 pc|I rewound the primary of this transformer using lacker coated wire (20 in paralell to handle the current) with 9 windings. This is important because of the skin effect! https://de.aliexpress.com/item/4001091321165.html |
#### Miscellaneous
|name|purpose|properties|amount|source|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|wax|coating the high voltage part and the gap in the transformer to avoid corona discharge in the gap between the transformer and the secondary winding|not brittle at room temperature (arcs can jump through cracks)|depends on the size of your circuit, ~150ml should be enough |candle wax idealy mixed with some sort of soft wax like bees wax, I used wax collected from the shell of cheese|
|plastic sheet|contain the wax and the voltage multiplier|Must be a thick thermoplastic like the one of a drinking bottle in order to provide insulation|Length of your multiplier and wide enough to wrap 2-3 times around it. Approximately 30cmx30cm|Package of childrens toy, sheets for laminating paper, ...|
### Step 2: Assemble the circuit
#### ZVS driver
This part converts the 8V DC into 10-15V AC at 20-30kHz.
First, come up with a layout for all components, so that they fit into the case. I prepared the MOSFETs by adding the heatsink (Because I had smd ones, I soldered them on to a small sheet of copper foil), the zener diode and a thick piece of copper wire which forms the two rails of the resonant circuit. Then I put both MOSFET assemblys on top of each other faceing the same direction in order to make connecting ground easier. Connecting ground and the two diodes D1 and D2 holds everything together and the resistors can be added. Next, I soldered the resonance capacitors and the primary coil to the two rails. This is the part must be soldered very well, because it will conduct high current of around 10A. Be aware that one capacitor (can also be an additional small 50nF one) must be connected very close to the MOSFETs in order avoid some sort of ringing when the MOSFETs switch. Next, attach the switch with a short wire and solder the button on to a tiny pcb that fits in the slot in the case and connect the pcb with wires to the rest. For the power connector, just crimp the negative wire, the positive wire and a very small loop in to a connector.
#### Voltage multiplier
First, I soldered the diodes in series to form the 20kV diodes. Check if no diodes are backwards! I repeatedly placed a diode and a capacitor turning every second one 180° to form the multiplier. ![Voltage Multiplier1](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/390f7ce2-3f91-4184-b1cd-d64da38c05a7)
Then wrap the circuit in the plastic sheet and check where it touches the plastic and where you can make the circuit smaller.
#### Battery pack
Since I put two Li-Ion batteries in paralell, it is important to balance them before connecting them. For that I measured the voltage difference between two cells and connected both negative sides together and used a resistor to connect the positive side. Calculate this resistance based on the maximum charge current and the voltage difference of your batteries. Be aware of wire resistance. I let them sit a few days checking and drecreasing the resistance regularely until the voltage is almost equal and the internal resistance of the batteries is enough to do balance the rest. After creating pairs of batteries, take two pairs, put them side by side in a square, so that all negative are on one side with a negative wire for each pair going through the center to the positive side and wrap electrical tape around to hold them together. Connect two wires for positive each and crimp the battery connector on these four wires. Pay special attention not to short anything!
#### Battery charger
crimp the diode leads and the negative wire in to a connector and join the other side of the diodes to the positive wire. Ajust the power supply to your charging current and a Voltage of 4.2 Volts. After connecting the battery, you can measure the current and the voltage drop across the diodes when only 1mA is flowing. Set no more than this Voltage + 4.2V to the Voltage limit of your power supply.
### Step 3: Test the circuit and ajust frequency and power of the oscillator
### Step 4: Potting the high voltage parts
### Step 5: Ajust the 3d models to fit your build
### Step 6: Final Assembly
### Step 7: Make the battery pack
### Step 8: Make the charger
